Trio analysis (#3448)
galaxyproject/training-material: topics/variant-analysis/tutorials/trio-analysis/tutorial.md

> ### {% icon hands_on %} Hands-on: Add chr prefix using regex
>
> 1. {% tool [Column Regex Find And Replace](toolshed.g2.bx.psu.edu/repos/galaxyp/regex_find_replace/regexColumn1/1.0.1) %} with the following parameters:
>    - {% icon param-file %} *"Select cells from"*: `Decompressed VCFs` (output of **Convert compressed file to uncompressed.** {% icon tool %})
>    - *"using column"*: `Column: 1`
>    - In *"Check"*:
>        - {% icon param-repeat %} *"Insert Check"*
>            - *"Find Regex"*: `(?=^[0-9MYX])`
>            - *"Replacement"*: `chr`
>
> > ### {% icon comment %} Comment: Explaining the regex.
> >
> > The regex pattern might look complicated but it's quite simple if you break it down in components.
> >  - The first component is a positive lookahead `q(?=p)`. Here q is the matched part and p is the pattern. So what it does is to match everything (q) that comes before pattern (p).
> > - The pattern here is `^[0-9MYX]`, which can again be broken down into different components
> >      - `^` means that the pattern has to start at the beginning of the line not somewhere randomly in the line. This way our prefix `chr` will be inserted at the start of the line.

> > >      - `[0-9MYX]` means that at this position there should be a character from the list `[]`, namely either a number from `0-9` or the character `M`, `Y`, or `X`.

Reviewer: Quite a beast of a regex!
A much simpler solution is: `^([0-9MYX])` as the pattern to match and `chr\1` as the replacement pattern.

Reviewer: If you want to teach a bit more then consider adding a second "Check" with:
`^(##contig=<.*ID=)([0-9MYX].+)` as the pattern to match and `\1chr\2` as the replacement pattern, which will keep the header consistent.

Reviewer: @hexylena any preference here regarding the regex tool? The GalaxyP one used here does the job and so would tool_id=toolshed.g2.bx.psu.edu/repos/bgruening/text_processing/tp_replace_in_column/1.1.3

Reviewer 2: The galaxyp one is less likely to be installed everywhere (but ok so is ega download tool). I think I have a mild preference for the `tp_replace_in_column` here as it's more likely to be available, sorry for the extra steps @JasperO98.

And agreed regarding the need for the lookahead, if seems like it'd be functional without it since there's no `q` per your description.

Author: Hmm, I didn't know you could do that with regex. I've replaced the prefix check and added your check for the header lines. Thanks! 0816782f5e10f9b06a6fd96dccc51acca59bd54f

>
> 1. {% tool [GEMINI load](toolshed.g2.bx.psu.edu/repos/iuc/gemini_load/gemini_load/0.20.1+galaxy2) %} with the following parameters:
>    - {% icon param-file %} *"VCF dataset to be loaded in the GEMINI database"*: `SNPeff annotated VCF` (output of **SnpEff eff** {% icon tool %})
>    - {% icon param-file %} *"Sample and family information in PED format"*: the pedigree file prepared above
>
>
{: .hands_on}

## Find inheritance pattern
With the GEMINI database it is now possible to identify the causative variant that could explain the breast cancer in the mother and daughter. The inheritance information makes it a bit easier to determine which tool to run to find the causative variant, instead of finding it by trying all the different inheritance patterns. 

> ### {% icon question %} Question
>
> Which inheritance pattern could have occurred in this family trio?
>
> > ### {% icon tip %} Tip: Possible patterns
> > The available inheritance patterns can be found in the {% tool [GEMINI inheritance pattern](toolshed.g2.bx.psu.edu/repos/iuc/gemini_inheritance/gemini_inheritance/0.20.1) %} tool.
> {: .tip}
>
> > ### {% icon solution %} Solution
> >

> > >    - Since both the daughter and mother are affected and the father unaffected and it also being very unlikely that a men has breast cancer, the mutation is most probably dominant. The disease could still be recessive if the father has one copy of the faulty gene, however this is less likely. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> >    - Since both the daughter and mother are affected, the father likely unaffected[^1], the mutation is most probably dominant. The disease could still be recessive if the father has one copy of the faulty gene, however this is less likely. 
```

this is the syntax for a footnote, you can later (not inside the `>`s) write:

```
[^1]:  It is unlikely that the father has breast cancer, "For men, the lifetime risk of getting breast cancer is about 1 in 833" [via cancer.org](https://www.cancer.org/cancer/breast-cancer-in-men/about/key-statistics.html)
```

We offer two ways to download the files. Firstly, you can download the files directly from the EGA-archive by requesting DAC access. This will take only 1 workday and gives you access to all of the RD-Connect GPAP synthetic datasets. However if you don't have the time you can also download the data from zenodo.

{% include _includes/cyoa-choices.html option1="EGA-Archive" option2="Zenodo" default="EGA-Archive"
       text="Here you can choose to either follow the data preperation for the data from the EGA-archive or Zenodo." %}

<div class="Zenodo" markdown="1">
I see, you can't wait to get DAC access. To download the data from zenodo for this tutorial you can follow the step below.

> ### {% icon hands_on %} Hands-on: Retrieve data from zenodo
>
> 1. Import the 3 VCFs from [Zenodo](https://zenodo.org/record/6483454) to Galaxy.
>    ```
>    https://zenodo.org/record/6483454/files/Case5_F.17.g.vcf.gz
>    https://zenodo.org/record/6483454/files/Case5_IC.17.g.vcf.gz
>    https://zenodo.org/record/6483454/files/Case5_M.17.g.vcf.gz
>    ```
>
>    {% snippet faqs/galaxy/datasets_import_via_link.md %}
> 
> 2. Set the datatype to **vcf**.
>
> 3. Click on **Start**
>

> > 4. Put all the VCFs into one **collection** when they are uploaded.

Reviewer 3: just FYI, this can also be indicated in the upload dialog (by selecting the "collection" tab at the top). (this step is still good to include for people who missed that step, but maybe a nice thing to teach since it saves a bit of time to do it in the upload dialog)

Author: Thanks!

>
> 4. Click {% icon exchange %} **Create Dataset**.
>
> After transforming all the VCFs you need to combine the converted VCFs into a colllection again.
>
> > ### {% icon tip %} Tip: Adding files to collection
> >
> > 1. Click on the dataset **selector icon** {% icon param-check %} in your history.
> > 2. Select the 3 vcf files.
> > 3. Click on the button **For all selected...** and select **Build Dataset List**
> > 4. Give the new collection a name and click on **Create collection**.
> >
> {: .tip}
>
{: .hands_on}

</div>

# Pre-Processing
Before starting the analysis, the VCF files have to be pre-processed in order to meet input requirements of the tools which we will use for the downstream analysis. 

## Add chromosome prefix to vcf
Firstly, our next tool has some assumptions about our input VCFs. The tool expects the chromosome numbers to start with a prefix `chr`. Our VCFs only use the chromosome numbers however, the VCFs just use the chromosome numbers. This is due to a difference in reference genome used when creating the VCFs. To change the prefix in the VCFs we will use regex again.

> > ### {% icon hands_on %} Hands-on: Add chr prefix using regex

Reviewer 3: We could also consider using the tool "Replace chromosome names in a tabular dataset using a mapping table" to do this. We would need to give them a simple file like:

```
1 chr1
2 chr2
..
```

but will be less 'scary' than regex maybe? (I haven't tested this tool but..)

Reviewer 3: ah no, I was too quick, might not work properly on VCFs, nevermind

> >      - `[0-9MYX]` means that at this position there should be a character from the list `[]`, namely either a number from `0-9` or the character `M`, `Y`, or `X`.
> >      - The replacement pattern `chr\1` means that the prefix `chr` has to be inserted before the first match `\1`. Here the first match refers to the pattern in the first brackets `()` around the list `[0-9MXY]`.
> > - The second check `(##contig=<.*ID=)([0-9MYX].+)` > `\1chr\2` adds the `chr` prefix to the contig ids in the header lines. The check can be broken down into the following elements:
> >     - The first match, the pattern in the first brackets `##contig=<.*ID=`, matches the contig header lines, which start with `##contig=<`. It is followed by a match anything `.` for zero-or-more times `*` until it finds `ID=`.
> >     - The second match, the pattern in the second brackets `[0-9MYX].+`, matches the chromosome numbers and characters `[0-9MYX]` followed by a matching anything `.` for one-or-more times `+`.
> >     - The replacement pattern `\1chr\2` means that the prefix `chr` has to be inserted between the first match `\1` or `##contig=<.*ID=` and the second match `\2` or `[0-9MYX].+`.

> > {: .comment}

Author: Good point!

---
layout: tutorial_hands_on

title: Trio Analysis using Synthetic Datasets from RD-Connect GPAP
zenodo_link: 'https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.6483454'
questions:
- How do you import data from the EGA?
- How to download files with HTSGET in Galaxy?
- How do you pre-process VCFs?
- How do you identify causative variants?
objectives:
- Requesting DAC access and importing data from the EGA.
- Pre-process VCFs using regular expressions.
- Use annotations and phenotype information to find the causative variant(s).
time_estimation: 2H
key_points:

> - Downloading whole datasets with HTSGET is safe and easy with galaxy.

Reviewer 3: Please capitalize all occurrences of "Galaxy"

```suggestion
- Downloading whole datasets with HTSGET is safe and easy with Galaxy.

```

Author: Fixed. 76a329e7416e82ac840f51baaf63cb82a4358a73

> ### Agenda
>
> In this tutorial, we will cover:
> 
> 1. 
> {:toc}
>
{: .agenda}

# Data preperation
In this tutorial we will use case 5 from the RD-Connect GPAP synthetic datasets. The dataset that we will use consists of WGS VCFs from a real healthy family trio, which originates from the Illumina Platinum initiative {% cite Eberle2017 %} and was made available by the [HapMap project](https://www.genome.gov/10001688/international-hapmap-project). In our dataset a real causative variant was manually spiked-in that should cause breast cancer. The spike-in has been synthetically introduced in the mother and daughter. Here our goal is to identify the genetic variation that is responsible for the disease.

> We offer two ways to download the files. Firstly, you can download the files directly from the EGA-archive by requesting DAC access. This will take only 1 workday and gives you access to all of the RD-Connect GPAP synthetic datasets. However if you don't have the time you can also download the data from zenodo.

Reviewer 3: Maybe we can use the "Choose your own tutorial" feature Helena recently implemented? https://training.galaxyproject.org/training-material/topics/contributing/tutorials/create-new-tutorial-content/tutorial.html#choose-your-own-tutorial

People can press a button for either Zenodo or DAC-Access & EGA tool, and get shown only the relevant steps for each method.

Reviewer 3: (then can also only show the decompress step for the EGA download, not the Zenodo import)

Author: Looks nice! I've added it. 1fdc96f19dbd046bda8ae6a42cc4f2b0ff95635e

> ### {% icon comment %} Shortcut: Downloading files from zenodo
>
> If you can't wait to get DAC access you can also download the data from zenodo for this tutorial. How to do that is described below.
>
> > ### {% icon hands_on %} Hands-on: Retrieve data from zenodo
> >
> > 1. Import the 3 VCFs from [Zenodo](https://zenodo.org/record/6483454) to galaxy.
> >   ```
> >   https://zenodo.org/record/6483454/files/Case5_F.17.g.vcf.gz
> >   https://zenodo.org/record/6483454/files/Case5_IC.17.g.vcf.gz
> >   https://zenodo.org/record/6483454/files/Case5_M.17.g.vcf.gz
> >   ```
> >

> > > {% snippet faqs/galaxy/datasets_import_via_link.md %}

Reviewer 3: if you indent this to align with the block above, it won't reset the step counter (currently you have two steps labeled as "1" )

Author: I noticed, but I was not able to align it with the block above....
Is there a way around this?

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> >    {% snippet faqs/galaxy/datasets_import_via_link.md %}
```

that should be the correct indentation

Author: Thanks! c65eb2ba393676152771dca369b8ca45878d57d2

Author: I tried but it seems the snippet will not load properly.
It looks like this: 
`<blockquote class="tip"> <h3 data-toc-skip id="-tip-importing-via-links"> Tip: Importing via links</h3> <ul> <li>Copy the link location</li> <li> <p>Open the Galaxy Upload Manager (galaxy-upload on the top-right of the tool panel)</p> </li> <li>Select Paste/Fetch Data</li> <li> <p>Paste the link into the text field</p> </li> <li> <p>Press Start</p> </li> <li>Close the window</li></ul></blockquote>`
Also, it does not fix the numbering.

Author: Apparently, my tabs were 3 spaces big instead of 4 spaces...
Now it's fixed. e58cb8125506cede068681ee931b463c0a731482

> > 
> > 2. Set the datatype to **vcf**.
> >
> > 3. Click on **Start**
> >
> > 4. Put all the VCFs into one collection when they are uploaded.
> > 

> > > > ### {% icon tip %} Tip: Adding files to collection

Reviewer 3: You can use the existing snippet here for creating a collection: https://training.galaxyproject.org/training-material/faqs/galaxy/#collections

Author: Fixed 83467f5847160644fd4f287072637824551b0eb5

> {: .comment}
>
{: .hands_on}

## Download list of files
When you have access to the EGA dataset, you can download all the needed files. However, the EGA dataset contains many different filetypes and cases, but we are only interested in the VCFs from case 5 and, to reduce execution time, the variants on chromosome 17. To be able to donwload these files we first need to request the list of files from which we can download. Make sure to use **version 4+** of the {% tool [EGA Download Client](toolshed.g2.bx.psu.edu/repos/iuc/ega_download_client/pyega3/4.0.0+galaxy0) %}.

> ### {% icon hands_on %} Hands-on: Request list of files in the dataset
>
> 1. {% tool [EGA Download Client](toolshed.g2.bx.psu.edu/repos/iuc/ega_download_client/pyega3/4.0.0+galaxy0) %} **version 4+** with the following parameters:
>    - *"What would you like to do?"*: `List files in a datasets`
>    - *"EGA Dataset Accession ID?"*: `EGAD00001008392`
>

> > > ### {% icon tip %} Tip: Changing tool version.

Reviewer 3: There is also already a snippet for this (https://training.galaxyproject.org/training-material/faqs/galaxy/#tools)

Author: FIxed. b513e57556134e26bf9dab7905a00d75fb516bc4

time_estimation: 2H
key_points:
- Downloading whole datasets with HTSGET is safe and easy with galaxy.
- AWK and regex are usefull tools for pre-processing VCF files.
- Variant annotations allows us to strictly filter VCFs to find the causative variant.
contributors:
- Jasper Ouwerkerk

---

# Introduction
{:.no_toc}
To discover causal mutations of inherited diseases it’s common practice to do a trio analysis. In a trio analysis DNA is sequenced of both the patient and parents. Using this method, it’s possible to identify multiple inheritance patterns. Some examples of these patterns are autosomal recessive, autosomal dominant, and  de-novo variants, which are represented in the figure below. To elaborate, the most left tree shows an autosomal dominant inhertitance pattern where the offspring inherits a faulty copy of the gene from one of the parents. The center subfigure represents an autosomal recessive disease, here the offspring inherited a faulty copy of the same gene from both parents. In the right subfigure a de-novo mutation is shown, which is caused by a mutation during the offspring’s lifetime.

> | ![plot](../../images/trio-analysis/pedigree.svg) |
> |:--:|
> | **Figure 1:** *3 family trees representing autosomal dominant, autosomal recessive, and a de-novo inheritence patter from parents to son.* |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
![please write a better plot description here](../../images/trio-analysis/pedigree.svg "3 family trees representing autosomal dominant, autosomal recessive, and a de-novo inheritence patter from parents to son")
```

This can be handled automatically (including the numbering) via this syntax, `![alt-text](image.ext "the figure caption you want displayed")`

It also looks like this alt-text doesn't describe the image very well for users who are relying on a screen reader to access the content. We have a short guide on [what's appropriate for alt-text vs captions in the GTN Contributing Guide](https://training.galaxyproject.org/training-material/topics/contributing/tutorials/create-new-tutorial-content/tutorial.html#guidelines-on-alt-vs-figcaption-text) which has more details.

Author: Should be fixed in: c5727787e1bbd8eab2fe9c6b9be01bee010f7132

To discover these mutations either whole exome sequencing (WES) or whole genome sequencing (WGS) can be used. With these technologies it is possible to uncover the DNA of the parents and offspring to find (shared) mutations in the DNA. These mutations can include insertions/deletions (indels), loss of heterozygosity (LOH), single nucleotide variants (SNVs), copy number variations (CNVs), and fusion genes. 

> In this tutorial we will also make use of the HTSGET protocol, which is a program to download our data securely and savely. This protocol has been implemented in the {% tool [EGA Download Client](toolshed.g2.bx.psu.edu/repos/iuc/ega_download_client/pyega3/4.0.0+galaxy0) %} tool, so we don't have to leave galaxy to retrieve our data.

Reviewer: Make it clear in these paragraphs that this tutorial demonstrates how to obtain **variant information** from an online archive, not the original sequencing data (because that is the real difference compared to our existing tutorial).

Author: I've made it more clear in 2ca1e55afaade48fa3eb694b32f59b93f8d468f2

> 

Author: I've mentioned the tutorial in 61646b006fa56134ed4bfd2ba38bf1a0c521a6c3.

> ### Agenda
>
> In this tutorial, we will cover:
> 
> 1. 
> {:toc}
>
{: .agenda}

# Data preperation
In this tutorial we will use case 5 from the RD-Connect GPAP synthetic datasets. This data was built using the same three public genomic datasets from HapMap samples NA12877, NA12878, and NA12882, click [here](https://www.genome.gov/10001688/international-hapmap-project) for more info. In these datasets real causative variants which correlate with the phenotypic data are manually spiked-in. 

> The dataset consists of WGS from a family trio, in which both the mother and daughter are affected by breast cancer. Our goal is to identify the genetic variation that is responsible for the disease. 

Reviewer: Please improve this explanation. From what I understand, this is real WGS data from real family trio, but the mutation people are supposed to discover has been spiked in? So the phenotype within that trio was *not* breast cancer?
Please clarify.

Author: Exactly! I've made it more clear in: 10ff5199016c7a0b7e15ad5fdf62c69b35666a7f.

> ### {% icon hands_on %} Hands-on: Convert compressed vcf to uncompressed.
>
> Open the collection of VCFs and execute the following steps for each VCF.
>
> 1. Click on the **pencil** {% icon galaxy-pencil %} of the vcf you want to convert.
>
> 2. Click on the **convert tab** {% icon galaxy-gear %}.
>
> 3. Under **Target datatype** select `vcf (using 'Convert compressed file to uncompressed.')`
>
> 4. Click {% icon exchange %} **Create Dataset**.
>
> After transforming all the VCFs you need to combine the converted VCFs into a colllection again.
>
> > ### {% icon tip %} Tip: Adding files to collection
> >
> > 1. Click on the dataset **selector icon** {% icon param-check %} in your history.
> > 2. Select the 3 vcf files.
> > 3. Click on the button **For all selected...** and select **Build Dataset List**
> > 4. Give the new collection a name and click on **Create collection**.
> >
> {: .tip}
>
{: .hands_on}

> ## Add chromosome prefix to vcf

Author: It's more for the bcftools norm step since it uses a reference genome with those prefixes. A way around it could be to use the original genome used to call the variants instead of the local one on the EU Galaxy. Would that be better?

> ## Add chromosome prefix to vcf

Reviewer: I see. Then I don't know a way around decompressing and adding the prefix either.
However I less complicated way is to specify the datatype as `vcf` in the *Upload data* dialog. This will prompt Galaxy to decompress the file as part of the upload process and store it in the history *only* in this form, which means one step less and less quota consumption.

> ## Add chromosome prefix to vcf

Author: Oh, I didn't know that! I've added it in the tutorial but I still have to keep the decompress step when downloading the files from the EGA archive. 4cb441ff692dad48e6e2b2e1ea5bd6883e905c69

>    - {% icon param-file %} *"Select cells from"*: `Decompressed VCFs` (output of **Convert compressed file to uncompressed.** {% icon tool %})
>    - *"using column"*: `Column: 1`
>    - In *"Check"*:
>        - {% icon param-repeat %} *"Insert Check"*
>            - *"Find Regex"*: `(?=^[0-9MYX])`
>            - *"Replacement"*: `chr`
>
> > ### {% icon comment %} Comment: Explaining the regex.
> >
> > The regex pattern might look complicated but it's quite simple if you break it down in components.
> >  - The first component is a positive lookahead `q(?=p)`. Here q is the matched part and p is the pattern. So what it does is to match everything (q) that comes before pattern (p).
> > - The pattern here is `^[0-9MYX]`, which can again be broken down into different components
> >      - `^` means that the pattern has to start at the beginning of the line not somewhere randomly in the line. This way our prefix `chr` will be inserted at the start of the line.
> >      - `[0-9MYX]` means that at this position there should be a character from the list `[]`, namely either a number from `0-9` or the character `M`, `Y`, or `X`.
> > 
> {: .comment}
>
{: .hands_on}

> ## Normalizing VCF

Author: Unfortunately not, since the bcftools norm tool expects the chr prefix which can only be added after decompressing the VCFs.

> ### {% icon hands_on %} Hands-on: Normalize VCF
>
> 1. {% tool [bcftools norm](toolshed.g2.bx.psu.edu/repos/iuc/bcftools_norm/bcftools_norm/1.9+galaxy1) %} with the following parameters:
>    - {% icon param-file %} *"VCF/BCF Data"*: `VCFs with chr prefix` (output of **Text reformatting** {% icon tool %})
>    - *"Choose the source for the reference genome"*: `Use a built-in genome`
>        - *"Reference genome"*: `Human (Homo sapiens): hg19`
>    - *"Left-align and normalize indels?"*: `Yes`
>    - *"~multiallelics"*: `split multiallelic sites into biallelic records (-)`
>    - In *"Restrict all operations to"*:
>        - *"Regions"*: `Do not restrict to Regions`
>        - *"Targets"*: `Do not restrict to Targets`
>    - *"output_type"*: `uncompressed VCF`
>
> > ### {% icon tip %} Tip: Check the normalization summary
> >
> > You can have a look at the summary to check what changes were made. First, expand the output of bcftools norm (by clicking on the box) and it should be listed in the box. If not you can find it by clicking on the icon view details {% icon details %} and look at the output of the ToolStandard Error.
> >
> {: .tip}
>
{: .hands_on}

> ## Filter NON_REF sites

Author: I have decided to use the _Filter data on any column using simple expressions_ tool. I would like to replace the NON_REF sites before loading the VCFs since that step takes more than 1 day if I keep the NON_REF sites. e61e6713377e9e1a815ea31629471c7ec0d4cf2e

>
> 1. {% tool [GEMINI load](toolshed.g2.bx.psu.edu/repos/iuc/gemini_load/gemini_load/0.20.1+galaxy2) %} with the following parameters:
>    - {% icon param-file %} *"VCF dataset to be loaded in the GEMINI database"*: `SNPeff annotated VCF` (output of **SnpEff eff** {% icon tool %})
>    - {% icon param-file %} *"Sample and family information in PED format"*: the pedigree file prepared above
>
>
{: .hands_on}

## Find inheritance pattern
With the GEMINI database it is now possible to identify the causative variant that could explain the breast cancer in the mother and daughter. The inheritance information makes it a bit easier to determine which tool to run to find the causative variant, instead of finding it by trying all the different inheritance patterns. 

> ### {% icon question %} Question
>
> Which inheritance pattern could have occurred in this family trio?
>
> > ### {% icon tip %} Tip: Possible patterns
> > The available inheritance patterns can be found in the {% tool [GEMINI inheritance pattern](toolshed.g2.bx.psu.edu/repos/iuc/gemini_inheritance/gemini_inheritance/0.20.1) %} tool.
> {: .tip}
>
> > ### {% icon solution %} Solution
> >

> > >    - Since the father is unaffected and both the daughter and mother are affected, the mutation is most likely dominant. The disease could still be recessive if the father has one copy of the faulty gene, however this is less likely. 

Author: I've read that its very rare for men to get breast cancer. I'll make it more clear. 987c082454478dd41c2f2a5fa388dd511b1d6ad3
